Ages ago, beyond the limits of mortal memory, the known world was collected under one empire. In these times, the major races of the world collaborated for the betterment of all – the arcane arts thrived, rendering what was once pure imagination actual; technology advanced at a rapid pace; and war was finally over. These times were prosperous and wonderful, and the people of this time grew bold. Nothing seemed short of their grasp: they uncovered secrets previously known only to the gods themselves; they unlocked passage to other planes and brought the resources and arcane materials they found there back with them; they charted the pilgrimage that all souls take when they leave this world and dragged their loved one’s back into their living arms. But the gods who these magnificent people had begun to forget had not forgotten them.


The gods became wary of these emboldened mortals. How long until they reached the gods’ own celestial realm? A thousand generations? A hundred? A decision was made by a council of the Pantheon – the mortals could not be allowed to transcend. But how might they be stopped? A great conflict brewed between the forces of compassion and the light and those of fear and the dark. Unbeknownst to the mortals below, wars of a magnitude that, if not contained, would have torn the material plane asunder were fought in their name and over their continued survival. Finally, at long last, there was peace, and a decision was made. There was to be a Great Scattering.

The land would be broken and the various people of the empire would be separated. The empire’s great feats of engineering and the magical arts would be dismantled and the passageways out of the material plane would be refortified. And so it was. The once single landmass that made up the known world was sundered and the people of this once great empire, scattered, lost their way – leaving only one remaining living vestige of the empire’s greatness, its common tongue. These days the world is quieter and whispers of what once was are seldom found outside of the dusty tombs of even the most ancient libraries.

These days, there are four great landmasses. To the West is the land of Dorthombar. Mountainous and covered in dense forest, this land is rich in natural resources, though only the truly hardy survive in its wilds. The mountain dwarfs, formerly of a single great clan during the lost age, call the mountains of this land home. To the South East of Dorthombar, lies Melnathyr. Shrouded in mystery, the elves seclude themselves in this strange land. The elves, long-lived and long-remembering as they are, keep many secrets from the age that was lost. To the North East of Dorthombar is the Barren Land. An inhospitable land of ice and rock, no known civilized folk call the Barren Land home. Finally, to the East, lies Manaes, the largest remnant of the land before the Scattering. Many peoples can be found in Manaes, but the land is wide and travel between them is not always easy. The humans of this land have not lost their emboldened spirit and, with the help of gnomish ingenuity, are making strides every day towards the faintest shadow of what once was.

The elves, naturally gifted ship builders that they are, have long traded with the dwarfs of Dorthombar for the materials that they require for their secret endeavors, and humanity has finally caught on. A generation of hard labor and bold experimentation later, and the combined human-gnome effort has finally developed a means to connect with their estranged dwarven cousins.

The gods now occupy themselves with trivialities or narrow aims, having become satisfied with their disruption of mortal progress. But mortality has not yet lost its spark.

These are the early days of a new age.